Abstract

Background

Observing behavior in the natural environment is valuable to obtain an accurate and comprehensive
assessment of a child’s behavior, but in practice it is limited to in-clinic observation. Research shows
significant time lag between when parents first become concerned and when the child is finally diagnosed
with autism. This lag can delay early interventions that have been shown to improve developmental
outcomes.

Objective

To develop and evaluate the design of an asynchronous system that allows parents to easily collect
clinically valid in-home videos of their child’s behavior and supports diagnosticians in completing
diagnostic assessment of autism.

Methods

First, interviews were conducted with 11 clinicians and 6 families to solicit feedback from stakeholders
about the system concept. Next, the system was iteratively designed, informed by experiences of families
using it in a controlled home-like experimental setting and a participatory design process involving domain

11/8/21, 6:34 PM A Novel System for Supporting Autism Diagnosis Using Home Videos: Iterative Development and Evaluation of System Design

experts. Finally, in-field evaluation of the system design was conducted with 5 families of children (4 with
previous autism diagnosis and | child typically developing) and 3 diagnosticians. For each family, 2
diagnosticians, blind to the child’s previous diagnostic status, independently completed an autism
diagnosis via our system. We compared the outcome of the assessment between the 2 diagnosticians, and
between each diagnostician and the child’s previous diagnostic status.

Results

The system that resulted through the iterative design process includes (1) NODA smartCapture, a mobile
phone-based application for parents to record prescribed video evidence at home; and (2) NODA Connect,
a Web portal for diagnosticians to direct in-home video collection, access developmental history, and
conduct an assessment by linking evidence of behaviors tagged in the videos to the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders criteria. Applying clinical judgment, the diagnostician concludes a
diagnostic outcome. During field evaluation, without prior training, parents easily (average rating of 4 ona
5-point scale) used the system to record video evidence. Across all in-home video evidence recorded
during field evaluation, 96% (26/27) were judged as clinically useful, for performing an autism diagnosis.
For 4 children (3 with autism and 1 typically developing), both diagnosticians independently arrived at the
correct diagnostic status (autism versus typical). Overall, in 91% of assessments (10/11) via NODA
Connect, diagnosticians confidently (average rating 4.5 on a 5-point scale) concluded a diagnostic outcome
that matched with the child’s previous diagnostic status.

Conclusions

The in-field evaluation demonstrated that the system’s design enabled parents to easily record clinically
valid evidence of their child’s behavior, and diagnosticians to complete a diagnostic assessment. These
results shed light on the potential for appropriately designed telehealth technology to support clinical
assessments using in-home video captured by families. This assessment model can be readily generalized
to other conditions where direct observation of behavior plays a central role in the assessment process.

Keywords: asynchronous telemedicine system, in-home behavior recording, naturalistic observation
diagnostic assessment, NODA Connect, NODA smartCapture, remote autism diagnosis

Introduction

Background and Motivation

According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the prevalence of autism in the United States
has been increasing dramatically, from 1 in 150 to 1 in 68 children between 2000 and 2010 [1,2]. Over the
same period, the median age of diagnosis remained relatively stable, around 53 months [1,2].

One key challenge with respect to diagnosing autism is the significant time lag (20-60 months) between
the age at which parents first become concerned about their child’s development and the age at which the
child receives a diagnosis from a qualified professional [3-5]. Moreover, many ethnic minorities, low-
income families, and rural communities lack access to health care professionals with autism-specific
expertise, resulting in delays in diagnosis [6-9]. Even in urban communities where services are more
widely available, timely access to diagnostic services is often hampered by long waiting lists. Delays in
diagnosis can lead to delays in early intervention services that have been shown to improve future learning
capabilities and developmental outcomes [10-13].

Another key challenge with respect to diagnosing autism is that although clinical professionals
acknowledge that observing behavior in the natural environment (eg, the home) is preferred for a
comprehensive assessment, in practice behavioral observations are limited to a single in-clinic observation
[10,11,14]. There are various barriers to more widespread use of home-based observation [14-18]. It is
time consuming and resource intensive for clinicians to travel to each family’s home to conduct an
observation, and impractical to do so for remotely located families. Even when home visits are feasible,
the presence of an unfamiliar observer may cause children to alter their behavior due to their awareness of
being observed. Such reactivity poses a threat to the validity of any data that are collected. In addition,
child behaviors of interest may not occur during the short span of a clinician’s home visit.

11/8/21, 6:34 PM A Novel System for Supporting Autism Diagnosis Using Home Videos: Iterative Development and Evaluation of System Design

In this paper, we consider the opportunity of designing a telehealth solution to support remote diagnosis of
autism through parent-recorded behavioral evidence of child suspected to have autism in the home.
Telehealth technology can connect families with clinicians and accelerate the diagnostic process. Indeed,
such technologies have recently been investigated as a means of supporting the delivery of treatment for
individuals with autism spectrum disorder, including remote coaching of parent-implemented early
intervention programs [19-21], behavioral assessments [22,23], and professional development [24]. Few
attempts have been made at exploring the potential for such technologies to support diagnostic assessments

Most current telehealth technologies support a real-time interaction between a remotely located clinician
and a caregiver or patient. By contrast, “store-and-forward” telehealth systems support video recordings of
live events, which are subsequently shared with a clinical expert for review and assessment. The latter
asynchronous approach, which we have adopted, offers several key advantages particularly relevant to the
case of remote diagnosis of autism. It enables families to record videos in their home, in the course of their
day-to-day activities, which ensures the capture of natural expressions of child behavior that are widely
acknowledged as crucial to making an accurate and comprehensive diagnostic assessment [10,11,14].
Moreover, because home recordings can be carried out over the course of several days, they may mitigate
some of the consequences of a single clinic-based or live telehealth assessment. These include the child’s
reactivity, child’s current mood or level of fatigue, or the likelihood that low-frequency behaviors may not
be observed. From a practical standpoint, it minimizes the need to coordinate schedules with a clinician,
and reduces the need for remotely located families to travel long distances to a clinic.

Research Questions and Contribution

Our research addresses two key challenges in designing a system for remote autism diagnosis using home
videos. Perhaps the most important challenge is how to enable parents to easily record clinically relevant
video evidence of their child’s behavior. Diagnostic assessments are typically designed to enable the
diagnostician to observe the child under more or less structured periods and different situations for a rich
sampling of the child’s behavior. Parents can record and share their concerns about their child, but may not
know the specific types of situations and behaviors the diagnostician needs to observe. Thus, the first
research challenge is how the parent-recorded video can be turned into meaningful clinical evidence
through the use of the right kind of technology and the design of the right user experience with that
technology. This paper summarizes our work on identifying and evaluating specific design features that
contribute to ease of use of the in-home recording system and clinical validity of parent-recorded video
evidence. The second challenge involves supporting diagnosticians in completing the remote autism
diagnosis. This involves enabling diagnosticians to review the videos in a systematic and structured way so
that they can map the situations and behaviors that they observe in the video to the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) diagnostic criteria [27,28]. In other words, the parent-
recorded video of child behavior must produce observations that become evidence to support clinical
judgment. This paper summaries our work on identification and evaluation of specific design features that
support diagnosticians in completing a remote diagnostic assessment.

The system that resulted from this work includes two components: NODA smartCapture and NODA
Connect. NODA smartCapture is a mobile phone-based application that enables parents to easily record
clinically relevant prescribed video evidence of their child’s behavior. It supports recording and uploading
4, up to 10-minute long naturalistic observation diagnostic assessment (NODA) scenarios, that were
chosen based on pilot research on video-based diagnosis of autism [29]. These scenarios include (1) the
child playing alone, (2) the child playing with a sibling or peer, (3) a family mealtime, and (4) any
behavior that is of concern to the parent. The first 3 scenarios provide opportunities for typical social
communication and play-based behaviors, whereas the last scenario allows parents to share evidence of a
behavior that is of particular concern to them. The NODA Connect is a Web portal for diagnosticians to
direct in-home video collection, access the child’s developmental history, and conduct a remote diagnostic
assessment by linking evidence of behaviors tagged in the videos to DSM criteria. Relying on clinical
judgment, the diagnostician renders an opinion about the child’s diagnostic outcome.

Paper Outline

11/8/21, 6:34 PM A Novel System for Supporting Autism Diagnosis Using Home Videos: Iterative Development and Evaluation of System Design

The rest of this paper is structured as follows. We first describe interviews with relevant stakeholders about
our system concept, that is, “remote assessment based on in-home video evidence.” Next, we outline the
iterative design of NODA smartCapture and NODA Connect. We then describe an in-field evaluation, in
which 5 families used NODA smartCapture in their homes to collect prescribed behavioral evidence and 2
diagnosticians reviewed videos from each family and independently performed an autism diagnosis using
NODA Connect. We report results on ease of use of NODA smartCapture, clinical validity of recorded
evidence, and NODA Connect’s support for diagnosticians in completion of a remote diagnostic
assessment. We conclude with a discussion on the utility and limitations of the system, potential design
enhancements, our vision for adoption of the system within current autism diagnostic practices, and how
such a prescription, collection, and assessment model can be generalized to other clinical applications.

Methods

Overview

First, interviews were conducted with parents of children with autism and clinicians to seek input from
these key stakeholders about the overall concept of the system. Next, NODA smartCapture was iteratively
designed, informed by experiences of families using it in a controlled experimental home-like setting. The
NODA Connect was designed using a participatory design process involving a collaborating diagnostician
with 20 years of experience in autism diagnosis and a domain expert in autism. Finally, an in-field
evaluation was conducted with families and diagnosticians.

Stage 1: Insight from Stakeholders

We conducted a series of structured one-on-one interviews, each lasting 2 hours, with parents (n=7) of
children with autism and clinicians (n=11) who work with this population. These interviews allowed us to
gather input from these key stakeholders about the overall system concept of “remote assessment based on
in-home video evidence,” and about its feasibility and potential utility. During the interview, a mock-up
design based on previous studies [29,30] was presented to elicit feedback from stakeholders. The mock-up
design included a mobile phone-based recording application to record the NODA scenarios and a Web-
based assessment portal to review the videos and tag behaviors for assessment.

Stage 2: Iterative Development

smartCapture Iterative development The NODA smartCapture application resulting from stage 1 was
iteratively improved, informed by the experiences of families using it in a home-like experimental setup.
Our goal was to identify specific design features that would enable parents to easily record clinically valid
video evidence by analyzing the usage pattern of the recording application in a controlled setting. Families
(n=8) and their child with autism as well as any siblings (n=18) visited the Georgia Tech Aware Home [31]
for 2 hours, 1 family at a time. The Aware Home has the look of a single-family home (fully equipped
kitchen; living room, bedrooms, and bathroom; furniture; TV, etc) except there are a number of cameras
installed throughout, enabling both recording and viewing a live feed of interactions happening in different
parts of the home (

Parents were asked to use the NODA smartCapture to record the 4 NODA scenarios, for up to 10 minutes
each. Before the study, the Aware Home was set up with toys and items for the snack (to simulate the
family mealtime). Ceiling-mounted cameras allowed us to observe the family from another room live as
they were using NODA smartCapture, and to record the whole session for subsequent review.

After the video recording, each parent completed an interview and was asked to rate the ease of use of the
system on a scale ranging from 1 (not easy to use) to 5 (very easy to use). In addition to this feedback from
parents and the video evidence recorded by them using NODA smartCapture, video recordings from the
fixed ceiling cameras were reviewed to gain further insight into how parents used the system.

The collaborating diagnostician was asked to rate each parent-collected video, for its clinical validity, on a
scale of 0-2 and give a justification for the assigned rating. A rating of “0” means that the video is not
clinically valid for conducting assessment whereas a rating of “2” indicates that the video is clinically

11/8/21, 6:34 PM A Novel System for Supporting Autism Diagnosis Using Home Videos: Iterative Development and Evaluation of System Design

valid. A rating of “1” indicates that the video is clinically valid but an additional video might be required
to fully assess the associated scenario. By analyzing the collaborating diagnostician’s reasons for the
assigned rating, we identified specific issues that lowered the clinical value of a video evidence.

After the first 4 of the total 8 families completed their participation, the design of NODA smartCapture
was revised based on initial findings about ease of use and issues lowering clinical utility. The revised
system was tested with the remaining 4 families. Once all families completed participation, NODA
smartCapture was subsequently improved based on findings from the experience of the last 4 families.

NODA Connect Iterative Development The NODA Connect Web portal was designed, through an
iterative design process, for diagnosticians to direct in-home video-collection process and conduct remote
diagnostic assessment. Our goal was to identify specific features that would support diagnosticians in
completing the diagnostic assessment for autism based on parent-collected videos, developmental history
information, and their clinical judgment. The initial design of NODA Connect was informed by previous
pilot research [29] and feedback from stakeholders solicited during the Stage 1 interviews about the system
concept. However, major design contributions came from a participatory design process involving a
collaborating diagnostician who had 20 years of experience in conducting autism diagnosis and a domain
expert in autism. Participatory design is a common method in the technology design community whereby
the designer works closely with the target user to collaboratively iterate on the design of a technology [32].
Before the in-field evaluation in the final stage of the research, the design of the NODA Connect platform
was further improved based on findings from a pilot assessment conducted via NODA Connect by the
collaborating diagnostician.

Stage 3: In-Field Evaluation

The iterative design process described in Stage 2 resulted in a final design of the remote autism diagnostic
assessment system that was then evaluated in the field. During this evaluation, the parents used NODA
smartCapture in their homes to record behavior evidence and the diagnosticians used NODA Connect to
review and tag the videos, and to complete a diagnostic assessment. We recruited 4 families with at least 1
child with a previously confirmed diagnosis on the autism spectrum and 1 family with a typically
developing child. Children were between 2 and 6 years of age (average 4 years). Parents were not given
any prior training on NODA smartCapture. They were hand-delivered a kit that included NODA
smartCapture preinstalled on an iPod touch and a tripod for mounting the iPod. During an in-home
deployment that lasted an average of 2 weeks, each family was asked to complete a brief child
developmental history online and use the NODA smartCapture application to record and upload the 4 10-
minute NODA scenarios. The collaborating diagnostician remotely guided the in-home evidence-
collection process by reviewing the videos as they were uploaded and sending alerts to the family as
needed to request that they rerecord a particular scenario.

We recruited 3 diagnosticians experienced in autism diagnosis and unfamiliar with our system to complete
the independent diagnostic assessments via NODA Connect. Each family’s videos were reviewed by at
least 2 diagnosticians, who were blind to the diagnostic status of the child. After completing each
diagnostic assessment via NODA Connect, the diagnosticians concluded whether the child had autism or
was typically developing. They were prompted to assign confidence ratings to the diagnostic outcome:
“How confident are you that the child has autism?” and “How confident are you that the child is typically
developing?” on a scale from | (not confident) to 5 (extremely confident). Including both of these ratings
allowed diagnosticians to indicate diagnostic uncertainty in cases where they were confident that the child
does not have autism but also did not think the child was typically developing. Other than the child’s age,
no other information was disclosed to the diagnosticians about the child’s developmental history until they
completed the diagnostic assessment via NODA Connect and reached a decision about the child’s
diagnostic outcome. At the end of this process, a follow-up interview was conducted for the diagnosticians
to reflect on their experience of remote diagnostic assessment. The child’s previous diagnosis and
developmental history were revealed during the interview.

Data analysis of the in-field evaluation of NODA smartCapture consisted of assessing its ease of use based

on parent ratings, the quality of the videos recorded by parents, and the system log about parents’ reliance

on help menu and navigation patterns though NODA smartCapture. The collaborating diagnostician rated

the clinical utility of parent-recorded videos using the same scale as described earlier for Stage 2. Data

11/8/21, 6:34 PM A Novel System for Supporting Autism Diagnosis Using Home Videos: Iterative Development and Evaluation of System Design

analysis of the in-field evaluation of NODA Connect consisted of analysis of how diagnosticians
completed diagnostic assessment by tagging videos and completing DSM checklist through NODA
Connect. To conduct this analysis, videos of screen capture when diagnosticians were conducting
assessment through NODA Connect were examined. In addition, for each child, we compared the outcome
of the assessment between the 2 diagnosticians, and between each diagnostician and the child’s previous
diagnostic status.

Results

Ease of Use of NODA smartCapture

Based on experiments in the controlled home-like setting in Stage 2, three main features were added to
NODA Connect to facilitate ease of use. First, icons on the home screen clearly depict each of the 4
NODA scenarios parents are being asked to record (
recording status were added so that a parent would know whether a video is being recorded or not, and
how many minutes of recording have elapsed (
an autostop feature that automatically stops the recording after 10 minutes was included to enable one-
click recording. Once video recording is completed, parents can upload it directly or save it on the device
to review the video first before uploading it.

These features were implemented based on results from the first 4 participating families of the controlled
experiment. Before these features were implemented in NODA smartCapture, the first 4 participating
parents gave an average ease-of-use rating of 3 on a 5-point scale, and the number (4 recordings,
1/scenario) and length of recorded videos (maximum 10 minutes) were not consistent with the instructions
that were given. Once these features were implemented, the next set of 4 parents gave an average ease-of-
use rating of 4, which was also maintained in the field evaluation. The second set of 4 parents who
participated in the controlled experiment and the 5 parents who participated in the in-field evaluation all
collected the right number of videos of appropriate length according to the given instructions. In addition,
the log analysis confirmed that parents were able to use NODA smartCapture easily during the in-field
evaluation. Parents did not rely much on the help menu even without any prior training for using NODA
smartCapture. Log analysis showed that only 2 families of the 5 accessed the help menu, | and 2 times,
respectively. In addition, on average 73% (22/30) of the time, parents took the shortest path from selecting
a recording scenario to starting a recording. Because there could be reasons other than complexity of the
NODA smartCapture that can contribute to stopping a recording and not completing it, analysis of the
workflow focused only on scenario selection to starting a recording.

Clinical Utility of Video Evidence

Based on data analysis from the controlled experiment in a home-like setting in Stage 2, we identified two
key features that increase the clinical utility of the recorded videos. These include an embedded
prescription feature and a notification feature.

While rating the clinical utility of videos recorded by parents in the controlled experiment, the
collaborating diagnostician identified two sets of issues that negatively influenced utility. The first set
related to the set up of the recordings. The most common set-up-related issue was incorrect field of view.
For example, parents often captured videos where the face of the child with autism, the relevant toys, or
the person that the child was interacting with were not clearly visible on camera, either because of the way
the camera was set up or mounted, or because it was too zoomed in or zoomed out. In some cases, parents
followed the child around while holding the camera, which was both distracting to the child and prevented
the parent from actively playing with the child during the recording. Other times, parents would not set up
the camera in advance of recording and would start recording while they are still setting up the camera on
the mounting device. The second set of issues related to the frequency and quality of interaction between
the child and the parent. Some parents interacted with the child excessively, preventing the clinician from
observing what the child does naturally when left alone. Other times there was insufficient interaction
between the parent and the child, and the diagnostician wished to observe how the child might react to the

11/8/21, 6:34 PM A Novel System for Supporting Autism Diagnosis Using Home Videos: Iterative Development and Evaluation of System Design

parent’s attempts to interact with him/her or whether the child would direct his/her attention to something.
Thus, both excessive and insufficient interaction between the parent and the child can make it difficult for
a diagnostician to reliably assess the child’s level of functioning.

In response to these two sets of issues, and in consultation with the collaborating diagnostician, we
embedded explicit instructions within the NODA smartCapture interface. This clinical prescription (

(staging), and how to interact with the child during the recording (social presses). These instructions were
intended to maximize the likelihood that the parent records the right kind of video evidence of their child’s
behavior from the diagnostician’s perspective. For each of the 4 recording scenarios, we established a set
of directions to improve the staging of the recording and a set of social presses that the parent was asked to
present to the child. Staging instructions covered the set up of the camera and the environment, such as (1)
making sure the child’s face and relevant objects and social partners are in the field of view of the camera;
(2) suggestions for appropriate play items, such as toys and books; and (3) across all scenarios, parents
were asked to set up the camera ahead of time, and to use a mounting device (tripod). Instructions for
social presses included specific actions the parent needed to take during the recording, such as calling the
child’s name, pointing to an object to see whether the child will look toward it. These actions represented
the types of social presses that a diagnostician might use while assessing the child in person.

In addition to the explicit directions embedded within the NODA smartCapture interface, we realized
(through our discussions with the diagnosticians) that diagnosticians may want to guide parents during the
in-home recording process. For example, the diagnostician may wish to ask the parent to rerecord a
scenario because the lighting conditions were poor, or because they want the parent to try a social press
again. Therefore, a notification system was included in the system (added before the in-field evaluation)
whereby the diagnosticians could send notifications to NODA smartCapture from the NODA Connect
Web portal. This feature was not intended to support real-time messaging; rather, it was intended to enable
the diagnosticians to review the videos uploaded by a parent for appropriateness in advance of the video
being used for the diagnostic assessment, and ask for additional recording as needed.

After incorporating these prescription and notification features, the clinical validity ratings of the parent-
collected videos increased from 81% (13/16) in the experimental controlled setting to 96% (26/27) in the
in-field evaluation. In total, 10 notifications were sent to families during the field study. Six of these
notifications were about instructions for parents to include particular social presses and 4 messages were
about confirming the status of recording. Utilization of the notification system reflects its usefulness.
Furthermore, the participating diagnosticians in the field evaluation were also asked to rate the usefulness
of the videos after they completed remote diagnostic assessment on a 5-point scale (1 indicates “not
useful” to 5 indicates “very useful”). Diagnosticians’ rating and qualitative feedback during the follow-up
interview confirmed that the videos collected by parents during the in-field evaluation were clinically
useful (average rating of 4) for conducting remote diagnostic assessment.

Completion of Diagnostic Assessment via NODA Connect

The iterative design process of NODA Connect in Stage 2 helped finalize features that support
diagnosticians in completing a diagnostic assessment based on the videos recorded by parents. These
include the following: (1) a set of predefined tags that the diagnostician can use to flag specific child
behaviors in the videos; (2) an integrated DSM checklist where each tag assigned by a clinician is mapped
to the relevant DSM subcriterion; and (3) access to the child’s developmental history entered by the parent
into the system.

Once diagnosticians receive appropriate video recordings, they can review them and begin tagging them
with behaviors relevant to diagnosing autism (
representing specific behavioral markers such as “no eye contact” or “repetitive play,” which were created
based on the diagnostic criteria for autism within the DSM. The list of tags was compiled by the
collaborating diagnostician and the autism domain expert, and vetted through conversations with several
other clinical experts. In total, there were 66 tags included in NODA Connect. These tags included both
atypical (n=57) behavior tags (representing atypical development) and typical (n=9) behavior tags

11/8/21, 6:34 PM A Novel System for Supporting Autism Diagnosis Using Home Videos: Iterative Development and Evaluation of System Design

(representing typical development). The goal of the tagging step is to have the diagnostician watch the
videos for any evidence of atypical or typical behavior, and flag moments in time when that behavior
occurs, without yet considering specific DSM criteria.

Once all the videos for a child are viewed and tagged, the diagnostician can review the DSM diagnostic
checklist (
formed the basis of the diagnostic checklist in the NODA Connect assessment portal. Subsequent to the
release of the DSM-V, tags and the diagnostic checklist were updated to reflect the new framework.

The DSM checklist contains categories of symptoms, with specific subcriteria for each category. The
DSM-IV included the following diagnostic categories: (1) qualitative impairments in social interaction; (2)
qualitative impairments in communication; and (3) restricted, repetitive and stereotyped patterns of
behavior, interests, and activities. Each of these 3 categories included 4 subcriteria. Within NODA
Connect, each tag inserted in the videos by the diagnostician during the video review step is automatically
mapped to the relevant subcriterion, and shows up as a video snippet (

Within the DSM checklist, the diagnosticians can review the tags and then check a Yes/No box to indicate
whether, based on the tags and their clinical judgment, the child meets that specific criterion. Once the
entire DSM checklist is filled, the diagnostician makes a determination about the child’s diagnosis of
autism based on the DSM criteria, developmental history, and clinical judgment. Note that within NODA
Connect the diagnosticians have access to the child’s developmental history that parents fill during the in-
home video-collection phase, although during our in-field evaluation we restricted access to this checklist
so that diagnosticians would remain blind to the child’s true diagnostic status.

Results from the in-field evaluation confirmed that NODA Connect features support diagnosticians in
completing a diagnostic assessment. Overall, in 91% of assessments (10/11) via NODA Connect,
diagnosticians reached a decision about diagnostic outcome that matched with the child’s previous
diagnostic status.

Analysis of the NODA Connect usage pattern during the in-field evaluation showed that there was not
much variability in the time taken to complete tagging and filling the DSM checklist by different
diagnosticians. Across all assessments, the total time taken to complete tagging all the videos of a child
and filling out the DSM checklist was on average 62 minutes (SD 14.8 minutes). Diagnosticians spent the
least amount of time (average 37 minutes) completing the assessment for the child who was typically
developing. After removing the two assessments for this child from the analysis, the average time spent
tagging videos and completing the DSM checklist was even more consistent (average 68 minutes, SD 8.3
minutes).

Comparative Results of Diagnostic Outcomes

The main focus of the work presented here was to iteratively develop and evaluate the design of the two
systems, NODA smartCapture and NODA Connect. In addition, given that during the in-field evaluation
the diagnosticians assigned a diagnosis to the child upon completing the assessment, we were able to
compare the diagnosis conducted through NODA Connect with the child’s previous diagnosis as indicated
in the child’s medical record. For 4 of the 5 children (3 children with a previous diagnosis of autism and 1
typically developing child), both the remote diagnosticians independently arrived at the same diagnostic
decision, and in agreement with the child’s actual diagnostic status. For the fifth child (with a previous
autism diagnosis), one diagnostician matched the diagnosis in the child’s record but the other did not,
although the latter indicated with high confidence that the child was not typically developing. A third
diagnostician independently reviewed this case via NODA Connect and also confirmed the diagnosis in
the child’s medical record. Overall, in 91% of assessments (10/11) via NODA Connect, diagnosticians
reached a decision about diagnostic outcome that matched with the child’s previous diagnostic status.

Discussion

Principal Findings

11/8/21, 6:34 PM A Novel System for Supporting Autism Diagnosis Using Home Videos: Iterative Development and Evaluation of System Design

The iterative design approach undertaken in this study enabled us to identify specific features of a store-
and-forward telehealth platform that supports remote diagnosis of autism using videos recorded by
families in their homes. The results of the in-field evaluation of NODA smartCapture and NODA Connect
demonstrated that our system design allowed parents to easily capture clinically useful evidence of child
behavior, and diagnosticians to complete a diagnostic assessment of autism with high confidence. See
Multimedia