INTRODUCTION
Autism
spectrum
disorder
(ASD)
is
a
serious
neurodevelopmental disorder that starts in early childhood
and is characterized by social communication barriers, restricted
interests, repetitive stereotyped behaviors, and abnormalities in
perception (1). In recent years, epidemiological survey data on
the incidence of ASD showed that the prevalence rate increased
from 0.07 to 1.8% in China (2). A large number of studies on
ASD have shown that early intervention helps improve patient
prognosis (3). However, age at ASD diagnosis is still 40 months
or even later (4). Therefore, early detection, early diagnosis and
eﬀective intervention are essential to achieve a better prognosis.
Understanding the early childhood behaviors of ASD will help
facilitate early intervention in infants and toddlers who are
suspected of having ASD and improve their prognosis, which has
very important social and economic implications.
The early social interaction between adults and children is
the basis of more complex social cognition. For children with
ASD, the lack of social abilities is especially prominent in their
early life. According to the 2013 version of the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, ﬁfth edition (DSM-5),
ASD symptoms are usually present in young children at the
age of 1–2 years. Occasionally, initial symptoms often involve
delayed language development, accompanied by a lack of social
interest or unusual social interactions, quirky play modes and
unusual communication patterns (1). A study by Barbaro and
Dissanayake on family videos and parental reports revealed early
warning signs in social interactions of children with ASD aged
12 to 24 months old (5), which included lack of joint attention,
lack of eye contact, lack of social smiling, lack of social interest
and sharing, no response to calling name, lack of gestures, and
communication impairments (5–9). This study would focus on
the diﬀerences of early social behavior between HR group and
TD group. Previous studies on early behavioral abnormalities in
ASD were mostly in the form of retrospective interviews with
parents or scale-based evaluations, which are highly subjective
and unfavorable for widespread promotion. In recent years, an
increasing number of studies have adopted objective methods
involving video for using behavioral coding (10–12).
Tronick et al. proposed the still-face paradigm (SFP) to test
infants’ emotion regulation ability and social expectations in
social interaction (13). Early maternal-infant interaction is the
core basis of infants’ social emotion, emotion regulation, and
social and communication development (14). The maternal-
infant relationship is the ﬁrst relationship developed in early
childhood. Flexible and frequent interaction is the basis for
early childhood emotional organization, attention switching and
the emergence of social skills (15). In the early maternal-
infant interaction, non-verbal communication is dominant. In
addition, in this process, young children learn the rules of
social participation and expressing forms of social expectations,
which provide a social framework for future social interactions
and relationships (16). There were studies applied SFP in
emotional regulatory of ASD and they found most of children
with ASD employed more simple regulatory behavior and
less complex strategies (17, 18). Additional, Cassel et al. also
found that there were diﬃculties for children with ASD to
develop socioemotional ability (10, 19). In this study, the
SFP was used to measure social behavior of HR group and
TD group.
There were studies applied machine learning methods to build
model for early screening of ASD based on the characteristic
values of biological indicators, such as electro-encephalogram
(20) and brain images (21), and they found the accuracy was
more than 80%. And in order to improve the stability and
reliability of model for early screening of ASD, it is essential to
combining social behavioral indicators with biological indicators
in the subsequent research. In this study, we would try to
build a model for early screening of ASD based on social
behavioral indicators.
METHODS
Participants
Forty-ﬁve infants and toddlers with high-risk autism spectrum
disorder (HR) who sought treatment at the outpatient clinic of
Child Mental Health Research Center, Nanjing Brain Hospital
Aﬃliated to Nanjing Medical University, from December 2017
to December 2018 were enrolled in the HR group, and 43 infants
and toddlers with typical development (TD) in the Nanjing area
were recruited during the same period and enrolled into the
control group (the TD group).
The inclusion criteria for the HR group were as follows:
(1) children with positive results based on the Modiﬁed
Checklist for Autism in Toddlers (M-CHAT) (22); (2) pediatric
psychiatrist recognized that the children met the core criteria
of ASD in DSM-5 but the months age was under 24 months;
(3) children aged 8 to 23 months old; (4) children whose
primary caregiver was the mother; and (5) children whose
guardian(s) agreed to participate in this study. The exclusion
criteria for the HR group were as follows: (1) children with
genetic or metabolic diseases, such as Rett syndrome and
fragile X syndrome; (2) children with neurodevelopmental
disorders other than ASD, such as language development
disorders alone and intellectual disability; (3) children with
a clear history of craniocerebral trauma; and (4) children
with
a
history
of
nervous
system
diseases
and
serious
physical illnesses.
The inclusion criteria for the TD group were as follows:
(1) children with TD whose sex matched that of the children
in the HR group; (2) children aged 8 to 23 months old; (3)
children whose primary caregiver was the mother; and (4)
children whose guardian(s) agreed to participate in this study.
The exclusion criteria for the TD group were as follows: (1)
children who suﬀered from various types of neurodevelopmental
disorders and mental disorders; (2) children with a clear history
of craniocerebral trauma; and (3) children with a history of
nervous system diseases and serious physical illness.
This study was approved by the Medical Ethics Committee of
Nanjing Brain Hospital Aﬃliated to Nanjing Medical University
(2017-KY089-01). All subjects’ guardians agreed to participate in
this study and signed informed consent forms.
Frontiers in Pediatrics | 
June 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 290

Qiu et al.
Early Screening for High-Risk ASD
Measure and Procedure
General Psychological Evaluation of the HR and TD
Groups
A self-guided general information questionnaire was used to
collect the general demographic data, past history, medication
history and family history of the study participants.
The Gesell Developmental Scale was used to assess the
developmental levels of all subjects after they were enrolled.
The Gesell Developmental Scale was used to evaluate the
developmental quotient (DQ) of children from 5 skill domains:
adaptive, gross motor, ﬁne motor, language and personal-social.
The severity of ASD symptoms in the HR group was
assessed using the Communication and Symbolic Behavior Scales
Developmental Proﬁle (CSBS-DP), the Childhood Autism Rating
Scale (CARS) and the Autism Behavior Checklist (ABC). The
CSBS-DP has 3 factor scores (social communication, language,
and symbolic behavior) and a total score. The lower the CSBS-
DP factor scores are, the more serious the ASD symptoms. The
CARS and the ABC only have a total score. The higher the total
scores are, the more severe the ASD symptoms.
Video of the Behaviors of the HR and TD Groups in
the SFP
The classic paradigm consists of three episodes: (1) the baseline
episode (face-to-face interaction, FF episode), during which the
mother and the child are required to have normal interactions;
(2) the still-face (SF) episode, during which the mother’s face is
required to present a neutral expression without any response to
the child’s action; and (3) the reunion episode, during which the
mother resumes normal interactions with the child. Currently,
the SFP can arouse children’s behavioral changes, e.g., a reduction
in eye gaze and positive facial emotion and an increase in
negative emotion when transitioning from the baseline episode
to the SF episode (13); this eﬀect has been recognized and
termed the SF eﬀect. In relevant studies, researchers also found
that the reason for the generation of the SF eﬀect in infants
and toddlers is the disappearance of social responses, such
as eye contact, when their mothers show a still face; the
disappearance of social signals causes the appearance of negative
emotions in infants and toddlers (23). The ﬁrst two episodes
are often used in research in a randomly presented order. In
the past few decades, the basic settings of the SFP have been
used as a method to explore early childhood social behaviors
(24–26), which the reason why this study chosen the ﬁrst
two episodes.
In the present study, all participants and their mothers were
video recorded during the SFP in a designated observation room
at the time of enrollment. The mother was sitting opposite to the
child, interacted with the child for 2 min under ﬁxed instructions,
and then stopped the interaction and maintained a neutral
face for 1 min. 
environment and procedure.
Infant and Caregiver Engagement Phases (ICEP) (27) and
Nichols et al. (28) deﬁne the coding indicators as follows: (1)
protest behavior - the infant shows facial expressions of anger
and frowns; the infant is upset, crying, arching the body, trying
to escape and expresses anger using gestures; (2) non-social
smiling—the infant smiles not at the mother but toward other
directions or at other objects; (3) eye contact—the infant looks
directly at the mother’s eyes or face instead of looking at the
camera or toward other directions; (4) social smiling—the infant
looks at the mother and takes the initiative to smile (initiating
a smile); after the mother smiles, the infant immediately
responds with a smile (smiling at each other); and (5) active
social engagement—the infant displays happy facial expressions,
including a clear smile, occasional cooing or active vocalization,
laughing, or babbling, and looks at the mother to initiate
interactions (proactively initiate active social engagement), or the
infant has a positive response to the interaction initiated by the
mother (responding to active social engagement).
The Observer XT 12 behavioral observation and recording
analysis system was used for coding. Video coding was completed
by 2 trained graduate students, and the duration and frequency
of the 5 indicators during the FF and SF episodes were calculated.
The duration was measured using seconds (s) as the unit, and
frequency was measured using the number of times as the unit. A
total of 18 videos (∼20%) were randomly selected to determine
intercoder consistency using the intraclass correlation coeﬃcient
(ICC). It was found that the 2 coders had high consistency: the
ICCs for protest behavior, non-social smiling, eye contact, social
smiling, and active social engagement were 0.76, 0.82, 0.81, 0.83,
and 0.79, respectively.
FIGURE 1 | SFP for infants and toddlers with HR.
Frontiers in Pediatrics | 
June 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 290

Qiu et al.
Early Screening for High-Risk ASD
TABLE 1 | Comparison of the general conditions between the HR group and the
TD group (mean ± SD).
HR group
TD group
t/χ2
P-value
(n = 45)
(n = 43)
Sex
Male
Female
Age
(months)
DQ
Adaptive
Gross motor
Fine motor
Language
Personal-social
HR, high-risk autism spectrum disorder; TD, typical development; DQ, developmental
quotient of the Gesell Developmental Scale.
Diagnostic Evaluation of Children in the HR Group at
2 Years of Age
At 2 years of age, the children in the HR group were evaluated
using the Autism Diagnosis Interview-R (ADI-R) and the
Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS). Two pediatric
psychiatrists then clinically diagnosed the children based on the
ASD diagnostic criteria in the DSM-5 and the aforementioned
evaluation results. All participants with conﬁrmed ASD (the ASD
group) reached the cut-oﬀ scores for ASD diagnosis for both
evaluation scales.
Analytic Approach
The sex diﬀerence between the HR and TD groups was compared
using the χ2 test. The diﬀerences between the HR group and
the TD group in social behaviors were determined using the
independent samples t-test. The correlations of social behaviors
in the HR group with age, DQ, and symptom severity were
analyzed using Pearson’s rho. Finally, models for early ASD
screening were constructed using machine learning methods
based on ASD group and TD group, and the HR group
(contained 40 children with conﬁrmed ASD and 5 children
with not met the criterions of ASD) would be used to veriﬁed
the eﬀectiveness of models for early ASD screening. P < 0.05
indicated that the diﬀerence was statistically signiﬁcant.
RESULTS
Comparison of the General Conditions
Between the HR Group and the TD Group
Age (months), adaptive DQ, language DQ, ﬁne motor DQ,
and personal-social DQ were signiﬁcantly diﬀerent (P < 0.05)
between the HR group and the TD group, while sex DQ and gross
motor DQ were not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent (P > 0.05) between the
two groups. See 
Comparison of the Social Behaviors
Between the HR and TD Groups During
Different SFP Episodes
During the FF episode of the SFP, there were statistically
signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the duration and frequency of eye
contact, social smiling, and active social engagement between the
HR group and the TD group (t =-4.93, −6.17, −3.54, −2.90,
−9.56, −8.34; all P < 0.05), while the diﬀerences in length and
frequency of non-social smiling and protest behaviors between
the HR group and the TD group were not statistically signiﬁcant
(t = 1.89, 1.69, 1.62, 1.55; all P > 0.05). See Figures 2A,B.
During the SF episode of the SFP, there were statistically
signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the duration and frequency of eye
contact and active social engagement between the HR group
and the TD group (t = −4.94, −5.34, −4.49, −6.16; all P <
0.05), while the diﬀerences in length and frequency of non-
social smiling, protest behaviors and social smiling between the
HR group and the TD group were not statistically signiﬁcant
(t = 1.91, 1.33, 0.80, −0.01, −1.98, −1.71; all P > 0.05). See
Figures 2C,D.
Analysis of the Correlation of Social
Behaviors With Each Factor for the HR and
TD Groups During the Different SFP
Episodes
In the TD group, the frequency of eye contact was signiﬁcantly
positively correlated with gross motor DQ for the SF episode
(P < 0.05); the other indicators had no statistically signiﬁcant
correlations with age and DQs (P > 0.05; 
During the FF episode, the duration of eye contact,
social smiling, and active social engagement for the HR
group
were
signiﬁcantly
positively
correlated
with
the
adaptive DQ, and the duration of eye contact and the gross
motor
DQ
were
also
signiﬁcantly
positively
correlated.
During the SF episode, the duration of eye contact was
signiﬁcantly
positively
correlated
with
the
language
DQ
and the ﬁne motor DQ, and the duration of active social
engagement and the language DQ were also signiﬁcantly
positively correlated (all P < 0.05). The other indicators
had no signiﬁcant correlation with age and DQs (P > 0.05;

The analysis of the correlation between clinical ASD symptom
severity and social behavior indicators suggested that there was
no statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence between social behavior
indicators and clinical symptom severity during the FF episode
(P > 0.05); during the SF episode, the duration of eye contact
was positively correlated with symbolic behavior factor score and
the total CSBS-DP score, the duration of active social engagement
was positively correlated with the total CSBS-DP score, and the
frequency of eye contact was positively correlated with the social
communication factor score, the language factor score, and the
total CSBS-DP score (all P < 0.05). The other indicators had
no signiﬁcant correlation with the symptom severity (P > 0.05;

Frontiers in Pediatrics | 
June 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 290

Qiu et al.
Early Screening for High-Risk ASD
FIGURE 2 | Comparison of the differences in social behaviors between the HR group and the TD group during the different SFP episodes. (A) Comparison of the
differences in the duration of social behaviors during the FF episode. (B) Comparison of the differences in the frequency of social behaviors during the FF episode. (C)
Comparison of the differences in the duration of social behavior during the SF episode. (D) Comparison of the differences in the frequency of social behaviors during
the SF episode. HR, high-risk autism spectrum disorder; TD, typical development; SFP, still-face paradigm; **P < 0.01.
Using Machine Learning to Construct
Models for Early ASD Screening
Through the follow-up of the HR group and the re-diagnosis of
the HR group at 2 years of age, we found that 5 (1 female and
4 males) out of the 45 infants and toddlers with HR no longer
met the diagnostic criteria for ASD [the non-ASD (N-ASD)
group]; the other 40 children still met the diagnostic standard
(the ASD group). And then the models for early ASD screening
were constructed using machine learning methods based on ASD
group and TD group.
We used the duration and frequency of eye contact, active
social engagement, and social smiling during the FF episode as
well as the duration and frequency of eye contact and active social
engagement during SF episode as the behavioral characteristics
of the samples. The ASD group and the TD group were used
as the samples. In the classiﬁcation of ASD (40 samples) and
its comparison group of TD (43 samples), each subject within
these 83 samples was used for testing the model that was trained
on the rest 82 samples. Then, the prediction labels of each test
sample corresponding to 83 classiﬁcation models were collected
to calculate the overall accuracy on this dataset. There were
82 training samples, and 1 sample was selected for testing.
The test set data were classiﬁed using the following machine
learning methods: support vector machine (SVM), naïve Bayes
and random forest. And the Python platform was used for
analyses. The Random Forest Classiﬁer, Gaussian NB and SVM
functions in Scikit-learn toolbox developed by Python were
employed for building classiﬁcation models, respectively.
The results showed that the accuracy of Bayesian classiﬁcation
was 80.54% for the FF episode and 82.35% for the SF episode, and
Frontiers in Pediatrics | 
June 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 290

Qiu et al.
Early Screening for High-Risk ASD
TABLE 2 | Analysis of the correlation of social behavior with age and DQ in the TD group during different SFP episodes (r-value).
Episodes and indicators
Age
(months)
Adaptive DQ
Gross motor DQ
Fine motor DQ
Language DQ
Personal-social DQ
Duration during the FF episode (s)
Eye contact
Social smiling
Active social engagement
Frequency during the FF episode (number of times)
Eye contact
Social smiling
Active social engagement
Duration during the SF episode (s)
Eye contact
Social smiling
Active social engagement
Frequency during the SF episode (number of times)
Eye contact
Active social engagement
TD, typical development; SFP, still-face paradigm; DQ, developmental quotient of the Gesell Developmental Scale; *P < 0.05.
TABLE 3 | Analysis of the correlation between social behaviors and age (months), DQ, and clinical symptoms of the HR group during different SFP episodes (r-value).
Episodes and indicators
Age
(months)
DQ
CSBS-DP
CARS
ABC
Adaptive Gross
motor
Fine
motor
Language
Personal-
social
Social
communication
factor
Language
factor
Symbolic
behavior factor
Total
score
Duration during the FF episode (s)
Eye contact
Social smiling
Active social engagement
Frequency during the FF episode (number of times)
Eye contact
Social smiling
Active social engagement
Duration during the SF episode (s)
Eye contact
Active social engagement
Frequency during the SF episode (number of times)
Eye contact
Active social engagement
HR, high-risk autism spectrum disorder; SFP, still-face paradigm; DQ, developmental quotient of the Gesell Developmental Scale; CSBS-DP, Communication and Symbolic Behavior
Scales Developmental Proﬁle; CARS, Childhood Autism Rating Scale; ABC, Autism Behavior Checklist; *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01.
that the accuracy of random forest classiﬁcation was 80.72% for
the FF episode and 83.13% for the SF episode. And the accuracy
of SVM classiﬁcation was 81.18% for FF episode and 83.35%
for the SF episode, which has higher accuracy. The confusion
matrix was showed in 
diﬀerences between the kids who were not picked up by the
machine learning, ASD group and TD group (total 83 kids) was
divided into 4 groups with month age, respectively, 8–11, 12–15,
16–19, and 20–23 (Figure S2).
Subsequently, the eﬀectiveness of the SVM classiﬁcation
model was veriﬁed in 40 children with conﬁrmed ASD and
5 N-ASD children in the HR group. Unfortunately, even
though the average classiﬁcation accuracy of SVM was more
than 80%, the 5 N-ASD was not classiﬁed correctly. The lack
of enough samples of N-ASD resulted in a large imbalance
between two groups. Such limited samples with only 10
indicators within each sample could be a possible reason for
low recall rate of N-ASD samples. Therefore, it is essential to
expand the sample of N-ASD in future study to verify the
eﬀectiveness of the SVM classiﬁcation model. What’s more, it
is necessary to build more eﬀective machine learning model in
following study.
Frontiers in Pediatrics | 
June 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 290

Qiu et al.
Early Screening for High-Risk ASD
TABLE 4 | The confusion matrix of SVM.
ASD
TD
FF episode
ASD
TD
SF episode
ASD
TD
ASD, autism spectrum disorder; TD, typical development; FF episode, face to face
interaction; SF episode, still-face episode.
DISCUSSION
Face-to-face interaction constitutes the beginning of early
childhood learning and deﬁning social interaction, and face-
to-face interactions between infants and toddlers and primary
caregivers allows the former to learn (1) the meaning of self-
expression behaviors; (2) the characteristics of people with whom
they have a close relationship; and (3) emotional information
and the perception of local culture, primary caretaker identity
and self-identity (13). Emotion regulation is an important link
of early childhood development milestones and is closely related
to primary caregivers (29). Studies have shown that strong
emotion regulation abilities in children is associated with good
development and can predict social emotional outcomes at later
stages (30–32) and that weak emotion regulation abilities during
early childhood are associated with behavioral problems and
development problems at later stages (29, 33, 34). Especially
from 4 to 9 months old, infants quickly learn how to regulate
emotions through face-to-face interactions; therefore, the quality
of infant-mother interactions is crucial at this stage (24, 35).
Through comparative analysis of the diﬀerences in social
behaviors between infants and toddlers with HR and infants and
toddlers with TD before the age of 2, compared with infants and
toddlers with TD, infants and toddlers with HR exhibited shorter
durations and lower frequencies of eye contact, social smiling,
and active social engagement during the FF episode of the SFP.
This ﬁnding is consistent with those of most studies (28, 36–
38). In the SF episode, compared with infants and toddlers with
TD, infants and toddlers with HR showed shorter durations and
lower frequencies of eye contact and active social engagement,
which means that although children with HR exhibited behaviors
to attract the attention of the non-responsive mothers, their
ability to initiate active social engagement was lower than that
of children with TD. For infants with HR, avoiding eye contact
results in a low-quality infant-mother interaction; therefore, the
development of emotion regulation abilities in these infants and
toddlers may be delayed, which explains to some extent the causes
of the delayed development of social smiling and active social
engagement in children with ASD.
From the results of the correlation analysis, there was a
diﬀerence between age and the developmental level and social
behaviors of some infants and toddlers in the HR group and
the TD group, but the diﬀerence was not representative, i.e., the
age and developmental level of the infants and toddlers did not
inﬂuence their social behaviors under general conditions. For
infants and toddlers with HR, the analysis of the correlation
between clinical symptoms and social behaviors showed that
there was no correlation between social behaviors and symptom
severity during the FF episode of the SFP. During the SF
episode, the duration of eye contact by infants and toddlers
with HR was positively correlated with the symbolic behavior
factor score and the total CSBS-DP score; the duration of social
smiling was positively correlated with the social communication
factor score and the total CSBS-DP score; and the duration of
active social engagement was positively correlated with the social
communication factor score, the symbolic behavior factor score
and the total CSBS-DP score; and the frequency of eye contact
was positively correlated with the social communication factor
score, the language factor score and the total CSBS-DP score. The
results indicated that the more ﬂexible and appropriate the eye
contact and active social engagement of the infants and toddlers
with HR, the less severe were the ASD symptoms, which is also
consistent with the results of most studies (39–41). Although the
social behaviors of infants and toddlers with ASD develop over
time, their development level is limited, the gap between infants
and toddlers with ASD and infants and toddlers with TD also
increases over time, and infants and toddlers with ASD develop
more clinical symptoms of ASD.
The SFP presents changes in children’s expressions, emotions
and behaviors in a more microscopic coding mode. On the
basis of setting a normal interaction, the SFP provides a social
challenge scenario by setting the SF episode, during which the
social signals of the mother are completely missing during the
period. For typically developing children, their inability to adapt
to the loss of social signals stimulated their ability to initiate
social interactions, express emotions, regulate emotions, and bear
stress. The analysis of the above results showed that the social
behaviors in infants and toddlers with HR, especially their social
behaviors during the SF episode of the SFP, were associated with
the core ASD symptoms. According to the extreme male brain
theory of autism (42, 43) the toddlers with ASD are more prone
to over systematization and thus have lower empathic ability than
do TD toddlers, making them more prone to deﬁciencies in social
and verbal communication. By examining the diﬀerences in
social behaviors between the infants and toddlers in the HR group
and the TD group, we found that although there were many
diﬀerences in the abnormal social behaviors between infants and
toddlers with ASD and infants and toddlers with TD during the
FF and SF episodes of the SFP, the social behaviors of infants
and toddlers with HR, such as eye contact and active social
engagement, during the SF episode (a frustration scenario), were
signiﬁcantly correlated with core communication impairments,
such as the social communication factor score, the symbolic
behavior factor score and the total CSBS-DP score. That is, the SF
episode of the SFP can better induce the social communication
impairments in infants and toddlers with ASD. Markram et al.
(44) proposed the intense world theory, suggesting that an
excessively active brain would excessively amplify ordinary
sensory experiences, causing the toddlers with ASD to be in a
state of fragmented sensory information and to be overloaded,
and because of such a strong reaction, the intense emotions
perceived by them from the surrounding environment causes
social withdrawal, resulting in a series of autism symptoms such
Frontiers in Pediatrics | 
June 2020 | Volume 8 | Article 290

Qiu et al.
Early Screening for High-Risk ASD
as social communication impairments and stereotyped behaviors.
Therefore, facing social communication challenges such as the SF
episode, infants and toddlers with TD attempted to arouse their
mothers’ responses by pointing and social smiling. In contrast,
for infants and toddlers with HR, even for those who had higher
function, they may have had good interactions with their mothers
during the FF episode, but when their mothers did not respond,
social pressure was reduced. They made fewer attempts or shorter
attempts to initiate social interactions.
In addition, some studies have shown that when responding
to emotional reactions, children with ASD have worse emotion
regulation abilities and more unreasonable expression and are
more likely to show negative emotions (45). However, in this
study, the negative emotions (protest behavior and non-social
smiling) in infants and toddlers with HR and TD were not
diﬀerent, and there were no diﬀerences during the frustration
scenario, i.e., when the mothers used still faces. Further validation
and discussion are needed in future studies.
Based on the re-diagnosis and regrouping of the children
at 2 years of age, machine learning methods, including SVM,
naïve Bayes and random forest, were used to construct models
for early ASD screening. And we found the classiﬁcation model
established using the SVM had the best performance, especially it
was found to have better screening ability and reliability for the SF
episode. Unfortunately, when the model was selected and applied
to the diﬀerential diagnosis of the children in the HR group, the
5 N-ASD was not classiﬁed correctly. And also, it is the goal to
identify N-ASD from ASD group in our future eﬀorts. Since the
age diﬀerences between the ASD group and TD group, we added
the Figure S2, in which we divided ASD group and TD group
(total 83 kids) into 4 groups with month age, respectively, 8–11,
12–15, 16–19, and 20–23, and we found there were not regularity
between the classiﬁcation accuracy vs. month age.
Similarly, there are limitations in this study. First, because
infants
and
toddlers
with
ASD
generally
have
delayed
development, the 2 groups were not matched by age to
make the development level of the HR group the same as that
of the TD group. Second, the sample size was small. In view of
these limitations, we will continue to expand the sample size
in future studies to further verify the ﬁndings under controlled
physiological and psychological ages. We hope that the SFP will
be widely applied for the early ASD screening and that a more
objective, standardized and convenient way for self-screening at
home will be achieved.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
All datasets generated for this study are included in the
article/Supplementary Material.
ETHICS STATEMENT
The studies involving human participants were reviewed and
approved by the Medical Ethics Committee of Nanjing Brain
Hospital Aﬃliated to Nanjing Medical University. Written
informed consent to participate in this study was provided
by
the
participants’
legal
guardian/next
of
kin.
Written
informed consent was obtained from the individual(s), and
minor(s)’ legal guardian/next of kin, for the publication
of any potentially identiﬁable images or data included in
this article.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
NQ and XK designed experiments. NQ, CT, MZ, JW, CL, XX,
JF, LZ, TX, and HF carried out experiments. NQ, CT, and WH
analyzed experimental results. NQ wrote the manuscript.
FUNDING
Key Research (Social Development) Foundation of Jiangsu
Province (BE2016616); the Fifth ‘‘333 High Level of Cultivating
Talents Projects’’ in Jiangsu Province.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online
at:

2020.00290/full#supplementary-material