Abstract

Background

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is currently diagnosed using qualitative methods that measure between
20-100 behaviors, can span multiple appointments with trained clinicians, and take several hours to
complete. In our previous work, we demonstrated the efficacy of machine learning classifiers to accelerate
the process by collecting home videos of US-based children, identifying a reduced subset of behavioral
features that are scored by untrained raters using a machine learning classifier to determine children’s “risk
scores” for autism. We achieved an accuracy of 92% (95% CI 88%-97%) on US videos using a classifier
built on five features.

Objective

11/8/21, 9:03 PM Detecting Developmental Delay and Autism Through Machine Learning Models Using Home Videos of Bangladeshi Children:...

Using videos of Bangladeshi children collected from Dhaka Shishu Children’s Hospital, we aim to scale
our pipeline to another culture and other developmental delays, including speech and language conditions.

Methods

Although our previously published and validated pipeline and set of classifiers perform reasonably well on
Bangladeshi videos (75% accuracy, 95% CI 71%-78%), this work improves on that accuracy through the
development and application of a powerful new technique for adaptive aggregation of crowdsourced
labels. We enhance both the utility and performance of our model by building two classification layers:
The first layer distinguishes between typical and atypical behavior, and the second layer distinguishes
between ASD and non-ASD. In each of the layers, we use a unique rater weighting scheme to aggregate
classification scores from different raters based on their expertise. We also determine Shapley values for
the most important features in the classifier to understand how the classifiers’ process aligns with clinical
intuition.

Results

Using these techniques, we achieved an accuracy (area under the curve [AUC]) of 76% (SD 3%) and
sensitivity of 76% (SD 4%) for identifying atypical children from among developmentally delayed
children, and an accuracy (AUC) of 85% (SD 5%) and sensitivity of 76% (SD 6%) for identifying children
with ASD from those predicted to have other developmental delays.

Conclusions

These results show promise for using a mobile video-based and machine learning—directed approach for
early and remote detection of autism in Bangladeshi children. This strategy could provide important
resources for developmental health in developing countries with few clinical resources for diagnosis,
helping children get access to care at an early age. Future research aimed at extending the application of
this approach to identify a range of other conditions and determine the population-level burden of
developmental disabilities and impairments will be of high value.

Keywords: autism, autism spectrum disorder, machine learning, developmental delays, clinical resources,
Bangladesh, Biomedical Data Science

Introduction

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a heterogeneous developmental disorder that includes deficits in social
communication, repetitive behaviors, and restrictive interests, all of which lead to significant social and
occupational impairments throughout the lifespan. Autism is one of the fastest growing developmental
disorders in the United States [1], affecting 1 in 59 children [2]. Although the global autism prevalence is
largely unknown, the prevalence is estimated to be between 0.15% and 0.8% among children in developing
countries such as Bangladesh, with a higher prevalence in urban centers (eg, 3% in Dhaka) [3]. These
numbers only represent a fraction of the actual cases, as most cases in semiurban and rural areas go
unnoticed due to a dearth of resources. The disparity between urban and rural prevalence may reflect
poorly understood risk factors or clinical resources in high-income areas along with higher awareness
among urban parents about developmental delays [4]. More accessible and wide-scale screening is needed
to accurately estimate ASD prevalence in remote parts of Bangladesh and other countries.

The current models for diagnosing autism in Bangladesh, as in the United States, are often administered by
trained clinical professionals using standard assessments [5]. Empirically validated diagnostic tools like
the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS) [6] and Autism Diagnostic Interview (ADI-R) [7]
are not always used in different countries, particularly in developing countries, as these tools are
expensive, require trained clinicians to administer, and may be limited by available translations and
cultural adaptations [4]. For countries with limited ASD resources like Bangladesh, obtaining a diagnosis,
which is essential for receiving an intervention and improving outcomes, is difficult. There is a pressing
need to further develop open-source tools that do not require extensive training and professional
certification and have high cross-cultural validity for autism screening globally [4]. Previous work has
shown the feasibility and efficacy of assessing developmental delay using rapid assessment tools delivered

11/8/21, 9:03 PM Detecting Developmental Delay and Autism Through Machine Learning Models Using Home Videos of Bangladeshi Children:...

by professionals with limited clinical expertise in the home [5]. There is potential to extend the reach of
assessment tools and decrease health care disparity, especially in developing and rural countries, by using
machine learning and mobile technologies.

In our previous works, we have developed tools for rapid mobile detection of ASD in short home videos of
US children by using supervised machine learning approaches to identify minimal sets of behaviors that
align with clinical diagnoses of ASD [8-15]. Features extracted in our minimally viable classifiers are
accurately labeled by nonexpert raters (ie, noncertified clinical practitioners) in a short period of time (eg,
<6 minutes). These labeled features can then be fed into our machine learning classifiers to determine the
child’s autism risk. Tariq et al [14] used a dataset consisting of 162 videos (116 ASD, 46 neurotypical
development [TD]) of US children to validate these classifiers. The top-performing classifier exhibited an
accuracy of 92% (95% CI 88%-97%).

Additionally, an independent validation set consisting of 66 videos (33 ASD, 33 TD) was labeled by a
separate set of video raters in order to validate the results. The top-performing classifier maintained similar
results, achieving an overall accuracy of 89% (95% CI 81%-95%).

The current study aimed to show generalizability of video-based machine learning procedures for ASD
detection that have established validity among US-based children [14] in Bangladesh. Specifically, our
study aimed to determine the performance and accuracy of this same video machine learning procedures
on videos of Bangladeshi children under the age of 4 years. This sample was drawn from a population
diagnosed with ASD and another population with other speech and language conditions (SLCs), but not
ASD. Additionally, we compared the features that are most important for accurate classification of children
from Bangladesh and created several machine learning models that can be generalized to different cultures.

Methods

Data Collection

The study received ethical clearance under Dr Naila Khan from the Bangladesh Institute of Child Health,
Dhaka Shishu Children’s Hospital (DSH) and the Stanford University Institutional Review Board. We
aimed to recruit 150 children for this study: 50 with ASD, 50 with an SLC, and 50 with neurotypical
development (TD). All participants were recruited after they provided consent (in Bengali language) for
participation at the DSH, and their children were screened for the presence of ASD or SLC. Participants
were enrolled if they were parents above 18 years of age, had a child between the ages of 18 months and 4
years, could attend an appointment at the DSH to complete the study procedures, and were willing to
submit a brief video of their child to the study team. Enrolled families provided demographic information
(see 

Brief videos (2-5 minutes) were recorded during evaluation of the children who presented to the Child
Development Center of the Bangladesh Institute of Child Health with neurodevelopmental concerns. We
administered the Modified Checklist for Autism in Toddlers (Bangla version [16]) to all children to
identify the presence of ASD, and all children underwent additional clinical evaluations by a
developmental psychologist and a child health physician in order diagnose ASD, SLC, or TD, as described
previously [5]. We also administered the ADOS for 28 of the 50 children identified with ASD; ADOS
could not be completed in the remaining 22 children diagnosed with ASD because their families were
unable to commit to the time required to complete the assessment, a common problem for families in low-
resource areas [4].

Acquired videos and supporting demographic measures were securely sent from DSH to Stanford
University. Videos were assessed for quality by trained clinical researchers at Stanford University. Criteria
included video, sound, and image quality in addition to video length and content (ie, ensuring that the
video was long enough to answer necessary questions, that the child was present in the video, etc).
Furthermore, videos were assessed to meet the following criteria: (1) it captured the child’s face and hands,
(2) it involved social interaction or attempts of social interaction, and (3) it involved an interaction
between the child and a toy/object.

Video Raters

11/8/21, 9:03 PM Detecting Developmental Delay and Autism Through Machine Learning Models Using Home Videos of Bangladeshi Children:...

Nine non-Bengali speaking US-based raters with no clinical training used a secure, HIPAA (Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act)-compliant online website to watch the videos and answer a
set of 31 multiple-choice questions corresponding to the behavioral features of autism [14]. Each rater
completed a 1-hour training session with a senior analyst before scoring the videos. Senior analysts
conducted rater quality checks by comparing a subset of 10 video scores to “gold standard” scores. These
“gold standard” scores were agreed upon by two clinical research coordinators who each had several years
of experience with children with autism.

Source Classifiers Trained on Clinical Data for Reduce-to-Practice Testing

We assembled eight published machine learning classifiers to test their viability for use in the rapid mobile
detection of autism through the use of short home videos of US children [14]. For all eight models, the
source of training and validation data was item-level medical records of US children, which contained
either the ADOS or ADI-R outcome data on all participants. The ADOS has several modules containing
approximately 30 features that correspond to the developmental level of the individual under assessment.
These features are assessed based on how a child interacts with a clinical practitioner administering the
exam. The ADI-R is a parent-directed interview that includes >90 elements asked of the parent, with
multiple choices for answers. Each model was trained on item-level outcomes from the administration of
either the ADOS or ADI-R and optimized for accuracy, sparsity of features, and interpretability in previous
publications [8-15]. All these classifiers have been validated with US home videos (total: n=162, ASD:
n=116, non-ASD: n=46) [14]. The top three performing classifiers in this dataset were chosen for
validation of the videos collected from DSH in Bangladesh to test the accuracies of these models across
cultures.

Stacked Classifiers With Rater-Adaptive Weighting

In an effort to improve the results on the Bangladeshi dataset after attempting to validate previously built
classifiers on these data, we constructed new classifiers while controlling for potential noise resulting from
inaccurate ratings and constructed separate layers for each step of the classification for a streamlined
approach. Our dataset contained three classes—TD, ASD, and SLC—assigned by screening via clinical
evaluation at the DSH [5]. By implementing a layered approach to classification—first distinguishing
general developmental delays (including ASD and SLC) from TD and then distinguishing ASD from SLCs
—we were able to broaden the detection capabilities to more generally classify the presence of other
developmental delays in addition to ASD specifically.

Rater Weighting Given the raters’ lack of formal clinical training, we hypothesized that some raters might
be more adept at identifying certain risk factors in some videos than others. Regardless of whether these
interrater differences in identification accuracy for certain subsets of behaviors arise naturally or by
chance, we hypothesized that this heterogeneous rater performance could be leveraged to yield increased
model performance. For example, if one rater is especially capable of labeling a child’s level of eye contact
and another rater does a poor job of rating eye contact but excels at rating language ability, then a model
trained on each individual rater’s labels alone might perform poorly; however, an ensemble that considers
the outputs of both rater’s models could perform substantially better. Achieving this improved performance
is the focus of our proposed novel rater-adaptive weighting scheme.

For each of the three raters in the dataset, we trained a Random Forest classifier to predict a child’s class
label (TD, SLC, or ASD) based on the rater’s annotations of that child’s behavior in a given video. The
Random Forest classifier adapts to each rater’s expertise and labeling patterns; a basic analysis revealed
that each rater had a different feature set that they rated well. In addition to (and, in part, because of)
interrater differences in the labeling ability, each rater’s model had varying levels of accuracy. We wanted
the ensemble to weigh the predictions from the most accurate rater models more heavily. Therefore, we
first trained and calculated the accuracy of each rater’s model relative to a majority vote baseline and then
used that difference to up- or downweigh that rater’s vote relative to the other raters’ votes.

Specifically, we let z; represent the difference in accuracy of rater j ’s model relative to the majority vote
baseline. Then, after calculating z; for each rater j=1, 2...K, we pass these values into the softmax function
to generate rater-specific weights:

11/8/21, 9:03 PM Detecting Developmental Delay and Autism Through Machine Learning Models Using Home Videos of Bangladeshi Children:...

This ensures that all the raters’ weights collectively sum up to 1, so that the ensemble prediction will be a
linear combination of each rater’s predictions. Using these weights, the final ensemble prediction for child
iis calculated by multiplying each rater model’s predicted probability for the target class (eg, atypical
development or ASD) by the corresponding rater-specific weight and adding the weighted raters’ predicted
probabilities together. More specific details can be found in Multimedia